Notes for people reviewing the code
===================================

"I want to review the code. How do I start?"
--------------------------------------------

Probably the easiest path is to just use mc^2 and forget about reviewing
for a while. Then, as you become familiar with mc^2, start your review
from the corners that interest you.

A different approach is to inspect the git commit history. This is
probably a harder path because if you're not familiar with mc^2 you won't
fully appreciate the small steps because you're not aware of "the big
picture".


Code size
---------

The source code may seem big at first glance but that's because it's
laden with comments. A source file usually contains just 10% to 50% of
actual code.


Code simplicity
---------------

You don't need to be a rocket scientist to understand the C code.

The C code is simple. It's "flat". It doesn't contain big functions that
call other functions, but instead many small independent functions that
expose some C function to Lua.

(Sometimes our C functions aren't small. This happens when we need to
fight around deficient API of MC itself. This should be solved in the
future by refactoring MC's code.)


We don't modify MC's core
-------------------------

To prove our claim, that adding scripting support doesn't add significant
maintenance liabilities, we don't modify MC's core. We just add a few
lines to it.


Pushing decisions and complexity to the Lua side
------------------------------------------------

You'll notice that our C code is simple and that we're pushing as much as
possible to the Lua side. For example, LuaFS is implemented almost
entirely in Lua. Its C portion simply delegates everything to the Lua
side. We do this for several reasons:

- It's easier to experiment with ideas on the Lua side as its a higher
level language. Sometimes we aren't sure of how the API we're designing
should look like. It's easy to "change your mind" in Lua.

- This higher level language also makes it trivial to implement things
that are much harder in C. As a result, what we create in Lua is often
more powerful than what we'd create in C.

- There's no reason not to. This might seem like a grave sin to a diehard
C programmer, but Lua isn't intended just for the end-user. We too may
use it.

- Users can apply patches (bug fixes, upgrades) without compiling the MC
binary.

- Greater transparency: there's something beautiful in having the
"average Joe" browse our code and understand how the system works.

- Encouraging the community to participate: more people feel cozy with a
high level language.


No support for the pulldown menu
--------------------------------

Currently there's no support for adding items to the pulldown menu.
There's no special reason for that: it just didn't look important enough.
The project had to be released to the public and some features just had
to be left out.


No support for...
-----------------

Beside the menu, there's also no support for plugging Lua into the
"Directory hotlist", the "user menu" and the "file extensions" mechanism.

These three features have many, many shortcomings. It's preferable, and
easy, to just write them anew in Lua. In return, thanks to Lua's dynamic
nature, we get virtually unlimited customizability and extensibility
(and, of course, break free of the current limitations).


Some things can be done differently and/or better
-------------------------------------------------

Care was taken not to look in other projects' code, in fear it'd violate
copyright issues. This was an unjustified precaution and we can certainly
revisit some decisions and see if we can borrow ideas from other
projects.


"But it crashes!"
-----------------

No, it doesn't. That is, not because of the Lua support. What you've
stumbled upon is most probably a bug in MC itself that might have been
fixed already in the "master" branch.


"But it's slow!"
----------------

No, it's not. That is, not because of Lua itself. There are a few modules
(e.g., the GIT-related ones) that execute various shell commands. To
learn more about what/when such commands are executed, enable the
@{devel.log|log}.

mc^2 was developed on a slow computer (Pentium 4) and no performance
issues with MC + Lua were ever encountered, or ever been seen on the
horizon --not even with a telescope.


"I'm looking at code samples and I see that the key sequences are hardcoded! E.g., 'C-y' is in the code. So your Lua code isn't customizable! It's a sham! Let me out of here!"
---------------------------

No, no, no, no, no. You're looking at code _snippets_. Since they serve
as examples, they have to be small and complete. So the key is hardcoded.
But if you look at @{git:official-suggestions.lua} you see that the
proper way is for modules to expose functions and then in your startup
file(s) to bind these functions to keys.
